>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY W>> Ifill: AND I'M GWE.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT: AS U.S.
MARKETS STAGE A BIG RALLY, WE
PULL BACK THE CURTAIN ON CHINA'S
ECONOMY: DOES THEIR RECENT
FINANCIAL TURMOIL REFLECT DEEPER
PROBLEMS OR EFFORTS TO
LIBERALIZE AND REFORM?
>> Ifill: ALSO AHEAD THIS
WEDNESDAY: WE CONTINUE OUR LOOK
AT KATRINA, TEN YEARS LATER.
A HOSPITAL SHUTTERED AFTER THE
STORM, MAJOR SHIFTS IN HOW
RESIDENTS GET HEALTH CARE.
ARE THE NEEDS OF NEW ORLEANS
>> CHARITY HOSPITALS IS WHERE
OENERATIONS OF RESIDENTS CAME T
CARE REGARDLESS OF THEIR ABILITY
TO PAY AND, FOR MANY, THE
MEASURE OF SUCCESS AT THE NEW
HOSPITAL IS WHETHER THAT
TRADITION WILL CONTINUE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, AN INTERVIEW
WITH FORMER NEW ORLEANS MAYOR
MARC MORIAL ON THE PROGRESS MADE
IN HIS CITY AND THE CHALLENGES
THAT REMAIN.
>> NEW ORLEANS HAS LONG BEEN,
LIKE MANY AMERICAN CITIES, A
TALE OF TWO CITIES.
>> Woodruff: AND A GAME CHANGER
FOR THE BLIND AND VISUALLY
IMPAIRED.
DESIGNING A SMART CANE THAT
HELPS NAVIGATE THE ENVIRONMENT
WITH EASE.
>> Ifill: ALL THAT AND MORE ON
>> Ifill: AFTER TAKING A BEATING
FOR SIX DAYS, WALL STREET
STORMED BACK AND HAD ITS BEST
DAY IN NEARLY FOUR YEARS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NEARLY 620 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 16,285.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 190
POINTS AND THE S&P 500 ADDED
MORE THAN 70.
THE MARKET'S VOLATILITY HAS BEEN
DRIVEN BY A SWEEPING SELL-OFF IN
CHINA WHERE THE MAIN INDEX LOST
ANOTHER 1% TODAY.
WE'LL EXPLORE THE CHINESE
PROBLEM AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Woodruff: TWO TV JOURNALISTS
IN ROANOKE, VIRGINIA WERE SHOT
DEAD TODAY DURING A LIVE MORNING
NEWSCAST.
REPORTER ALISON PARKER AND HER
CAMERAMAN, ADAM WARD, WERE DOING
AN INTERVIEW WHEN A FORMER CO-
WORKER-- VESTER LEE FLANAGAN--
OPENED FIRE.
HE LATER POSTED HIS OWN VIDEO OF
THE ACT ONLINE.
SEVERAL HOURS LATER, AFTER A
HIGHWAY CHASE, FLANAGAN RAN OFF
THE ROAD, SHOT HIMSELF AND DIED
AT A NORTHERN VIRGINIA HOSPITAL.
AND THAT LEFT INVESTIGATORS WITH
A MYSTERY.
RIGHT NOW THERE HAS NOT BEEN A
MOTIVE PER SE.
LOT OF YOU HAVE GOT E-MAILS THAT
HAD BEEN SENT OUT, IT'S OBVIOUS
THERE WAS-- THIS GENTLEMAN WAS
DISTURBED IN SOME WAY, THE WAY
THINGS TRANSPIRED AT SOME POINT
IN HIS LIFE. IT WOULD APPEAR
THINGS WERE SPIRALING OUT OF
CONTROL, BUT WE'RE STILL LOOKING
INTO THAT.
>> Woodruff: A MAN CLAIMING TO
BE THE GUNMAN SENT A LENGTHY FAX
TO ABC NEWS IN NEW YORK.
AFTER LISTING GRIEVANCES, HE
WROTE THAT HE WAS A "HUMAN
POWDER KEG JUST WAITING TO GO
BOOM!"
THE WOMAN BEING INTERVIEWED THIS
MORNING WAS ALSO SHOT.
SHE'S IN STABLE CONDITION.
>> Ifill: THE COLORADO MOVIE
THEATER SHOOTER, JAMES HOLMES,
WAS FORMALLY SENTENCED TO LIFE
IN PRISON WITHOUT PAROLE TODAY.
HE SHOT AND KILLED A DOZEN
PEOPLE AND WOUNDED 70 OTHERS
DURING THE 2012 ATTACK.
TODAY, HOLMES-- WEARING A RED
PRISON JUMPSUIT-- LISTENED AS
HIS FATE WAS PRONOUNCED.
THE LIFE TERM BECAME AUTOMATIC
WHEN THE JURY COULD NOT AGREE
UNANIMOUSLY ON THE DEATH
PENALTY.
>> Woodruff: IN AFGHANISTAN, TWO
MEN DRESSED AS AFGHAN SECURITY
FORCES OPENED FIRON NE ATO
TROOPS, KILLING TWO AMERICAN
SOLDIERS.
IT HAPPENED AT AN ARMY BASE IN
HELMAND PROVINCE.
THE SHOOTERS WERE KILLED BY
RETURN FIRE.
IT'S THE THIRD SO-CALLED
"INSIDER ATTACK" SO FAR THIS
YEAR.
>> Ifill: THERE'S WORD THE
MASTERMIND OF THE KHOBAR TOWERS
BOMBING IN SAUDI ARABIA HAS BEEN
CAPTURED NEARLY 20 YEARS AFTER
THE ATTACK.
SAUDI REPORTS AND U.S. OFFICIALS
SAY AHMED AL-MUGHASSIL WAS
ARRESTED IN LEBANON AND IS NOW
IN RIYADH.
THE 1996 BOMBING KILLED 19
AMERICAN TROOPS AT A U.S.
MILITARY HOUSING COMPLEX.
SAUDI OFFICIALS BLAMED SHIITE
EXTREMISTS, INSPIRED BY IRAN.
>> Woodruff: HUNGARY'S BORDER
WITH SERBIA WAS A PICTURE OF
CHAOS AGAIN TODAY AMID TALK
SENDING IN THE ARMY.
DESPERATE PEOPLE-- MOSTLY FROM
SYRIA, IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN--
CLIMBED THROUGH RAZOR WIRE.
A SCUFFLE BROKE OUT AT A REFUGEE
CENTER AND POLICE USED TEAR GAS-
- WHILE SOME LAWMAKERS CALLED
FOR A HARDLINE.
THE ONLY SOLUTION IS THAT
HUNGARY MAKES IT CLEAR FOR THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY, FOR
SERBIA, FOR THE EUROPEAN UNION
THAT IT HAS CLOSED ITS BORDERS
AND WE WILL TURN EVERYBODY BACK
WHO SHOWS UP AT THE BORDERS.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, IN
GERMANY, PROTESTERS JEERED
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL AS SHE
VISITED AN ASYLUM CENTER.
SHE CONDEMNED ATTACKS ON
REFUGEES AS "SHAMEFUL AND
REPULSIVE".
THE PRESIDENT OF SOUTH SUDAN
SIGNED A PEACE DEAL TO END 20
MONTHS OF FIGHTING THAT'S KILLED
THOUSANDS AND DRIVEN TWO MILLION
PEOPLE FROM THEIR HOMES.
BUT SALVA KIIR TOLD REGIONAL
LEADERS THAT HE WAS SIGNING
DESPITE "SERIOUS RESERVATIONS".
THE REBEL LEADER ALREADY SIGNED
THE AGREEMENT.
>> Ifill: IN THE U.S.
PRESIDENTIAL RACE, REPUBLICAN
DONALD TRUMP DEFENDED HIS
ACTIONS IN A CONFRONTATION
WITH TV JOURNALIST JORGE RAMOS.
THE UNIVISION HOST CHALLENGED
TRUMP ON HIS IMMIGRATION PLAN,
AT A NEWS CONFERENCE TUESDAY IN
DUBUQUE, IOWA AND THE CANDIDATE
FIRED BACK.
SIT DOWN YOU WEREN'T CALLED, SIT
DOWN, SIT DOWN, GO AHEAD.
NO YOU DON'T, YOU HAVEN'T BEEN
CALLED, GO BACK TO UNIVISION.
>> Ifill: WITH THAT, TRUMP'S
SECURITY HUSTLED RAMOS OUT.
A SHORT TIME LATER, HE WAS
ALLOWED BACK, AND THE TWO
RESUMED ARGUING.
TODAY, ON NBC, TRUMP SAID RAMOS
WAS "TOTALLY OUT OF LINE."
RAMOS, SPEAKING ON ABC, SAID:
"AS A JOURNALIST, YOU HAVE TO
TAKE A STAND."
>> Ifill: CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER
AMELIA BOYNTON ROBINSON DIED
TODAY, AFTER SHE'D SUFFERED A
MAJOR STROKE IN JULY.
SHE WAS A KEY ORGANIZER OF THE
1965 VOTING RIGHTS DRIVE IN
SELMA, ALABAMA, AND SHE WAS
BEATEN UNCONSCIOUS THERE BY
STATE TROOPERS ON "BLOODY
SUNDAY".
THIS YEAR, SHE JOINED PRESIDENT
OBAMA IN CROSSING THE EDMUND
PETTIS BRIDGE ON THE 50TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE SELMA-TO-
MONTGOMERY MARCH.
AMELIA BOYNTON ROBINSON WAS 104
YEARS OLD.
>> Woodruff: AND ONE OF TWO
NEWLY-ARRIVED GIANT PANDA CUBS
HAS DIED AT THE WASHINGTON
NATIONAL ZOO.
THE MOTHER, MEI XIANG, GAVE
BIRTH TO TWINS OVER THE WEEKEND,
BUT FOCUSED HER ATTENTION ON THE
LARGER CUB.
THE SMALLER ONE DIED THIS
AFTERNOON.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR: WHAT DOES CHINA'S
MARKET MELTDOWN SIGNAL FOR THE
FUTURE OF ITS ECONOMY?
TEN YEARS AFTER KATRINA,
IMPROVING ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE
FOR ALL PATIENTS, NO MATTER
THEIR ECONOMIC MEANS.
PLUS, FORMER MAYOR AND NATIONAL
URBAN LEAGUE PRESIDENT MARC
MORIAL ON THE CHALLENGES THAT
REMAIN FOR NEW ORLEANS AND MUCH
>> Woodruff: AS WE SAID, WALL
TO BREAK ITS LONG STREAK.
BUT BACK IN CHINA, ANOTHER
VOLATILE DAY LED TO BIG SWING
BETWEEN STOCK GAINS AND LOSSES
AS WORRIES MOUNTED OVER THE
STATE OF THE WORLD'S SECOND
LARGEST ECONOMY.
THAT'S OUR FOCUS TONIGHT AND WE
BEGIN WITH THIS REPORT FR PAUOML
MASON OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
THE SHANGHAI STOCK MARKET ENDED
DOWN LAST NIGHT, AGAIN, AND HAS
NOW LOST A QUARTER OF ITS VALUE
IN FIVE DAYS, AND NEARLY HALF
ITS VALUE SINCE JUNE.
THAT IS THE MONEY OF THE CHINESE
MIDDLE CLASS, POURED INTO SHARES
AFTER THE PROPERTY BUBBLE BURST.
AND BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT
ENCOURAGED IT, THE CHINESE
GOVERNMENT IS THROWING
EVERYTHING IT CAN AT THE
PROBLEM.
IT'S SPENT HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS
ON ACTUALLY BUYING SHARES TO
KEEP THE PRICE UP.
IT'S DEVALUED ITS CURRENCY,
AND YESTERDAY'S QUARTER-PERCENT
INTEREST RATE CUT WAS THE FIFTH
THIS YEAR.
NOTHING IS WORKING.
>> IN THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT TO
IN THIS CASE, TRYING TO UP THE
MARKET.
THAT'S CHUCKING $485 BILLION
INTO DIRECTLY BUYING SHARES AND
TRYING TO PERSUADE PEOPLE
THEY'LL STAND BEHIND THE MARKET
AT THIS POINT IN TIME.
CHEAP LOANS USED TO FUNDAMENTAL
BUILDINGS, PUBLIC MONEY, MASSIVE
INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING.
THE PLAN WAS THE MIDDLE CLASS
PROFIT FROM STOCK MARKET GAINS
AND TAKE OVER FROM DRIVING
GROWTH.
BUT IT'S NOT HAPPENING.
NOW, CHINESE PEOPLE FACE THE
DOUBLE NIGHTMARE OF SLOWING REAL
ECONOMY AND FINANCIAL MELTDOWN.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO TWO
PEOPLE WHO FOLLOW EVENTS IN
CHINA CLOSELY: NICHOLAS LARDY IS
AN ECONOMIST AND A SENIOR FELLOW
AT THE PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS.
HE HAS WRITTEN A NUMBER OF BOOKS
ON CHINA'S ECONOMIC GROWTH,
INCLUDING, MOST RECENTLY,
"MARKETS OVER MAO: THE RISE OF
PRIVATE BUSINESS IN CHINA."
AND EVAN OSNOS, AUTHOR OF THE
BOOK "AGE OF AMBITION: CHASING
FORTUNE, TRUTH AND FAITH IN THE
NEW CHINA."
HE'S ALSO A WRITER FOR "THE NEW
YORKER" MAGAZINE.
WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NICK, LET ME
START WITH YOU.
YOU WROTE IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" TODAY ALL THIS TALK ABOUT
CHINA BEING IN AN ECONOMIC AND
FINANCIAL MELTDOWN IS JUST
WRONG.
WHY DO YOU BELIEVE THAT?
>> THE EVIDENCE DOESN'T SUPPORT
IT YET.
THEY COULD BE HEADING IN THAT
DIRECTION IHE
MONTHS OR QUARTERS, BUT THE
ECONOMY IS ACTUALLY GROWING
REASONABLY WELL, ABOUT 7%,
CONSUMPTION DEMAND IS FAIRLY
STRONG, INCOMES AND WAGES ARE
GROWING ABOUT 10% PER YEAR.
THE SERVICE SECTOR IS THE BIG
DRIVER OF ITS GROWTH, SO IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE AN ECONOMY
THAT'S GOING OVER THE CLIFF AS
SOME HAVE ANTICIPATED.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU THINK
IS HAPPENING RIGHT NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT'S
HAPPENING IS MOSTLY A MAJOR
CORRECTION IN EQUITY PRICES.
THE PRICES GOT WAY AHEAD IN THE
YEAR TO THE PEAK.
THE PEAK WAS IN JUNE SIX WEEKS
OR SO AGO, AND IN SHANGHAI,
PRICES WERE UP 150%, IN THE SHUN
JUNG MARKETS, THEY WERE UP BY
EVEN MORE.
PRICES WERE IN THE STRATOSPHERE.
A LOT OF LEVERAGE.
PEOPLE BORROWED MONEY TO BUY
STOCKS.
PEOPLE WERE REQUIRED TO SHARE
THE SELLS OR THE BROKERS SOLD
THEM FOR THEM, SO YOU HAD A BIG
DOWNWARD, SHARP DECLINE IN
EQUITY PRICES.
BUT THE EQUITY -- YOU KNOW,
PRICE-EARNINGS RATIO WHICH IS A
VERY COMMON MEASURE IS STILL WAY
AHEAD OF WHAT IT WOULD BE IN THE
U.S.
IN THE CHINA MARKET IT'S ABOUT
39, FOR EXAMPLE.
SO THIS WAS AN OVERHEATED MARKET
THAT WAS GOING TO CORRECT SOONER
OR LATER.
>> Woodruff: IT'S STILL GOING
ON.
EVAN OSNOS, YOU WERE BASED THERE
FOR YEARS AND STILL STAY CLOSE
WITH THOSE IN CHINA.
HOW DO THEY SEE WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> WE'RE SO USED TO ECONOMIC
GROWTH, BOTH THOSE OF US HERE
AND PEOPLE IN CHINA, THAT WHEN
WE SEE THIS KIND OF TURMOIL AS
IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS, IT FEELS
RADICAL.
WE HAVE TO SEPARATE IN SOME
SENSE WHAT WE'RE SEEING ON THE
STOCK MARKET AND WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THE BROADER ECONOMY.
IN THE BROADER ECONOMY, WE'RE IN
THE MIDST OF A MAJOR
TRANSFORMATION AND IT'S A LIKELY
HARD THING TO DO.
I THINK THE REPORT MENTIONED IN
THE LEAD-IN, CHINA FOR 30 YEARS,
THEY SUCCEEDED ON A CERTAIN
RECIPE, WHICH WAS EXPORTS,
SENDING THINGS TO US HERE AND
BUILDING THINGS AT HOME,
INFRASTRUCTURE.
THAT RECIPE RUN ITS COURSE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO MOVE TO AN
ENTIRELY DIFFERENT ECONOMIC
CHAPTER.
CHINESE APPLE OR GOOGLE,
SOMETHING THAT CAN UNLEASH POWER
AND PUT MONEY IN THE HANDS OF
ORDINARY PEOPLE.
DOING THAT IS DIFFICULT AND
WE'RE SEEING THE TURMOIL OVER
THAT.
>> Woodruff: WHY HAS IT BEEN
SO HARD FOR THE LEADERSHIP TO
GET IT RIGHT?
>> THERE ARE SHORT-TERM REASONS
TO WANT TO GO SLOWLY.
FOR INSTANCE, IF YOU'RE ONE OF
THE PEOPLE WHO SUCCEEDS UNDER
THE CURRENT SYSTEM, A
STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISE OR
PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT THAT
BUILDS BRIDGES, YOU HAVE A LOT
OF REASONS TO WANT TO PUT THE
BRAKES ON REFORM.
WE ASSUME THE CHINESE LEADERSHIP
IS ONE MONOLITHIC GROUP.
THERE ARE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
VOICE IN THERE AND A LOT OF
PEOPLE ARE SAYING, WELL, LET'S
TRY TO SLOW DOWN AND KEEP THE
MARKET FROM COLLAPSING.
>> Woodruff: TO WHAT EXTENT
HAVE THEY MADE A DECISION TO TRY
TO TURN THIS MONOLITHIC ECONOMY
WHICH IS IN TRANSITION AROUND
AND MOVE TOWARD SOME REFORMS
THAT YOU HAVE WRITTEN ABOUT?
>> WELL, IN PRINCIPLE, THEY'VE
MADE DECISIONS TO CHANGE TO A
NEW GROWTH MODEL, AS EVAN HAS
SAID.
IN PRACTICE, IT'S DIFFICULT TO
CARRY OUT.
THEY'VE MADE PROGRESS.
CONSUMPTION HAS BECOME A MORE
IMPORTANT DRIVER OF ECONOMIC
GROWTH, AS OPPOSED TO BUILDING
MORE PROPERTY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND MORE MONEY IS FILTERING INTO
THE HANDS OF PEOPLE AND YOU SEE
A HUGE INCREASE IN EXPENDITURES
ON SERVICES, PEOPLE ARE SPENDING
A LOT OF MONEY ON EDUCATION,
HEALTHCARE, ENTERTAINMENT,
TRAVEL HAS BECOME A BIG PART OF
THE ECONOMY, SO WE'RE MOVING
AWAY FROM THE INDUSTRIAL BASED
GROWTH THAT WAS SO IMPORTANT FOR
SO LONG TOWARDS THIS MORE
CONSUMPTION-DRIVEN MODEL.
BUT IT'S CHALLENGING AND THEY'VE
MADE SOME PROGRESS OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS, BUT THERE IS STILL A
SUBSTANTIAL WAY TO GO.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS IT
THOUGHT, EVAN OSNOS, THAT THE
LEADERSHIP WANTS?
HOW OFTEN ARE THEY WILLING TO GO
AND HOW DO YOU KNOW FOR A FACT
THAT'S WHAT THEY WANT BECAUSE
THERE WAS A LOT OF SPECULATION
LAST WEEK THAT THIS WAS AN
EFFORT TO SHORE THINGS UP IN
SHORT-TERM AND NOT AT ALL
EVIDENT THEY'RE COMMITTED TO
REFORM.
>> XI JINPING, HEAD OF THE
CHINESE PARTY AND MILITARY, HAS
STAKED HIS NAME AND REPUTATION
INTERNALLY AND ABROAD SAYING I'M
GOING TO TRANSFORM THE ECONOMIC
ELD.
YOU KNOW HE'S ENCOUNTERING
RESISTANCE BECAUSE HE SAYS I AM
ENCOUNTERING FIERCE RESISTANCE,
TO SAY WE ARE IN A FIGHT.
THAT TELLS US THERE ARE SERIOUS
CONFLICTS GOING ON INSIDE
CHINESE POLITICS.
PEOPLE WHO SAY LET'S NOT MOVE
TOO FAST OR WE'LL UNDERMINE ALL
WE HAVE.
SO I THINK YOU'RE SEEING LESS
SECOND THOUGHTS AMONG THE
LEADERSHIP THAN IT IS A REAL WAR
WITHIN TO FIGURE OUT HOW FAST
AND FAR YOU CAN GO.
>> Woodruff: HOW DOES THAT
PLAY OUT?
IF THIS IS AN INTERNAL DEBATE,
AND THERE IS EVERY EVIDENCE THAT
IT IS, NICK LARDY, HOW DO YOU
SEE THIS MOVING FORWARD?
>> I AGREE WITH EVAN, IT'S A
CONFLICT BETWEEN THOSE WHO WANT
TO MAINTAIN CONTROL AND THOSE
WHO WANT TO RELY MORE ON THE
MARKET.
SO THAT'S THE TUSSLE.
THE EVIDENCE IS AS THEY'VE
RELIED MORE ON THE MARKET OVER
THE LAST DECADES, THEIR ECONOMY
HAS BEEN GROWING STRONGLY.
I THINK AS THEY DEBASEMENT THIS,
THEY ARE NOT ALWAYS GOING TO GO
FOR CONTROL OVER THE MARKET.
ATTEND OF THE DAY, THE PARTY
NEEDS TO HAVE REASONABLY STRONG
GROWTH TO REMAIN IN POWER, AND
THEY RECOGNIZE ULTIMATELY THAT
THE MARKET IS WHAT'S GOING TO
DELIVER THAT GROWTH, NOT
TRADITIONAL STATE ENTERPRISES
AND A HEAVY-HANDED GOVERNMENT
INTERVENTION IN THE MARKETS.
>> Woodruff: SO EVAN OSNOS,
WHAT'S GOING TO BE DRIVING THE
THINKING OF THE LEADERSHIP OF
CHINA IN THE COMING MONTHS?
>> XI JINPING IS COMING NEXT
MONTH, THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE
THINGS ARE AS STABLE AS THEY CAN
WHEN HE COMES.
WE SOMETIMES THINK THE CHINESE
GOVERNMENT IS IMPERVIOUS TO ITS
OWN PUBLIC OPINION.
IT'S AN AUTHORITARIAN GOVERNMENT
AND DON'T HAVE ELECTIONS LIKE WE
HAVE.
THE TRUTH IS THEY'RE VERY
SENSITIVE AND SOMETIMES VERY
AFRAID PUBLIC OPINION.
THEY KNOW A DISSATISFIED PUBLIC
IS PRECURSOR TO POLITICAL AND
SOCIAL UNREST.
SO THEY CAN LOOK OVER THE
HORIZON AND SAY, IF WE CONTINUE
ON THIS ECONOMY PATH, WE'LL
STALL ECONOMICALLY AND GET
TRAPPED IN THE MIDDLE INCOME
TRAP, MEANING WE WON'T BE ABLE
TO MAKE THE FINAL LEAP TO BEING
A FULLY ADVANCED COUNTRY, AND
THAT IS THE REAL RISK FOR THEM
OVER THE LONG TERM POLITICALLY.
THERTHERE'S THE SHORT TERM POLIL
INSTABILITY THEY'RE TRYING TO
AVOID BY A STOCK MARKET CRASH.
THEY KNOW THEY'RE FALLING SHORT
OF MAKING THE REFORMS THEY'RE
TRYING TO MAKE.
>> Woodruff: THANK YOU FOR
HELPING US UNDERSTAND BETTER,
EVAN OSNOS, NICK LARDY, THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: NOW, WE TURN TO OUR
WEEKLONG SERIES ON HOW NEW
ORLEANS IS FARING AFTER KATRINA,
TEN YEARS LATER.
THE FLOODWATERS THAT ROSE AFTER
THE STORM TRAPPED HUNDREDS OF
PATIENTS IN THE CITY'S
HOSPITALS.
MORE THAN 140 OF THEM DIED IN A
SLOW MOTION EVACUATION THAT TOOK
DAYS.
THINGS WENT FROM BAD TO WORSE
WHEN OFFICIALS DECLARED THE
MUCH-LOVED STATE-RUN CHARITY
HOSPITAL UNFIT TO RE-OPEN.
A MAJOR NEW HOSPITAL WAS
DEDICATED IN NEW ORLEANS TODAY--
A CRUCIAL PART OF A REIMAGINED
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM.
BUT WORRIES REMAIN THAT SOME
WILL STILL BE LEFT BEHIND.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JACKIE
JUDD HAS OUR REPORT.
HURRICANE KATRINA AND ALL
THAT THE WIND, THE RAIN, THE
FLOODING DESTROYED OR DISABLED
ALLOWED FOR A REIMAGINING OF
WHAT A MODERN HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
IN NEW ORLEANS WOULD LOOK LIKE.
THIS IS THE CENTERPIECE OF THAT
REIMAGINING.
>> UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER
NEW ORLEANS IS A PLACE TO HEAL,
TEACH AND DISCOVER FOR
GENERATIONS TO COME.
U.N.C. NEW ORLEANS, THE FUTURE
OF HEALTHCARE IS HERE.
>> UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER WAS
A DECADE IN THE MAKING AT A COST
EXCEEDING $1 BILLION.
MOST OF THAT FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT.
THE DOORS RECENTLY OPENED TO A
HIGH-TECH TRAUMA CENTER,
EXPENSIVE ARTWORK AND WHAT'S HUF
WINDOWS AND INTERNAL SYSTEMS.
EARLY REVIEWS ARE IN.
>> NEW INNERSIDE, CLEAN.
ORLEANS NEEDS A GOOD
HOSPITAL.
>> CHARITY WAS A GOOD HOSPITAL.
IN THE DAY WHEN I WAS GROWING
UP, IT WAS A GOOD HOSPITAL, BUT
THIS IS WAY BETTER.
>> ACTUALLY BUILT OUT FOR
REDUNDANCY FOR ONE PATIENT INTO
SOMETHING --
>> IN CASE OF A STORM?
.
DR. PETER W. WHO WORKED AT
CHARITY HOSPITAL THEN IN
MAKESHIFT TENTS, A CONVERTED
DEPARTMENT FOR AND FINALLY THE
INTERIM HOSPITAL IS PROUD OF
WHAT THE CITY HAS BUILT.
THIS HOSPITAL'S AIM, HE SAYS, IS
TWOFOLD -- SERVE THE POOR AS
CHARITY DID, AND THOSE WHO PAY
FULL PRICE.
>> THE VISION OF THIS HOSPITAL
IS NOT TO BE SOLELY AN INDIGENT
CARE OR SAFETY NET HOSPITAL.
THAT'S A VITAL PORTION OF WHAT
WE DO, BUT SUSTAINABILITY OF
THIS HOSPITAL WILL BE DIRECTLY
LINKED IN OUR ABILITY TO ATTRACT
ALL PAYERS.
WHAT'S NEW AND EXCITING IS
BUILDING DESTINATION SERVICES.
SO SERVICES THAT ALLOW US TO
COMPETE WITH THE HOUSTON OR
BIRMINGHAM, TO KEEP REGIONAL
PATIENTS HERE AT HOME.
>> FROM THE WINDOWS OF THE NEW
HOSPITAL, WHAT CAME BEFORE IS IN
CLEAR SIGHT.
CHARITY HOSPITAL HOLDS A STORIED
PLACE IN THE CITY'S HISTORY
BECAUSE IT'S WHERE GENERATIONS
OF RESIDENTS CAME FOR CARE
REGARDLESS OF THEIR ABILITY TO
PAY AND, FOR MANY, THE MEASURE
OF SUCCESS AT THE NEW HOSPITAL
IS WHETHER THAT TRADITION WILL
CONTINUE.
>> AND WE PUT THAT TOGETHER LONG
BEFORE.
>> THIS WAS IN CHARITY?
YES.
SYLVIANA HISTORY WORKED AS A
NURSE'S AID AND HEALED THERE AS
A PATIENT.
>> EVERY TIME I PASS THERE I
THINK ABOUT CHARITY BECAUSE
THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT IN
NEW ORLEANS IS CHARITY.
>> THIS HOSPITAL WAS RUN BY A
NONPROFIT PRIVATE COMPANY ADDING
THAT CHARITY'S SERVING THE
PUBLIC NO MATTER THE COST WILL
BE LOST.
UNIVERSITY IS REQUIRED TO HAVE
20% OF UNINSURED IN ITS PATIENT
MIX, CONSIDERABLY LESS THAN
CHARITY.
BUT OFFICIALS PROMISE TO GIVE
CARE TO THOSE WHO NEED IT.
(SINGING)
>> COMMUNITY ACTIVIST JACQUES
ORGANIZED A LAWSUIT TO GET
CHARITY BACK UP AND RUNNING.
>> WORKING FOR PEOPLE WHO
TRUSTED CHARITY TO TAKE GOOD
CARE OF THEM AND REASSEMBLING
THE INTELLECTUAL CAPITAL FOR
PATIENTS WITH THE TEAMWORK AND
KNOW HOW IS NOT LIKE ASSEMBLING
LEGGOS.
IT TAKES LOTS OF TIME, WORK AND
MONEY.
>> DR. W. WHO ONCE ARGUED FOR
THE OLD HOSPITAL TO REOPEN NOW
SAYS THE QUALITY OF CARE AT
CHARITY HAS BEEN ROMANTICIZED
AND CONCERNS ABOUT THE NEW
HOSPITAL ARE UNFOUNDED.
IF YOU ARE SO CONVINCED OF THE
SUCCESS OF THIS MODEL, WHAT DID
YOU FIGHT HARD TO TRY TO KEEP
CHARITY OPEN?
>> SO WHAT I TRIED HARD TO DO
WAS TO KEEP OPEN A FACILITY THAT
WOULD MEET ON THE SAFETY CARE
NEEDS OF OUR POPULATION, AND I
WOU CONLDTINUE THAT FIGHT TODAY
IF WE WALKED AWAY FROM THAT
MISSION.
THAT'S AS STRONG AS ITS EVER
BEEN.
>> WHAT WE HOPE FOR YOU TO DO
BETWEEN NOW AND THE NEXT
VISIT --
>> THE OTHER HALF OF THE
REIMAGINING IS AN EXTENSIVE
NETWORK OF COMMUNITY HEALTH
CENTERS.
THE CLINICS DOT POOR AND WORKING
NEIGHBORHOODS THROUGHOUT THE
CITY AND PROVIDE PRIMARY CARE.
DR. KAREN DESALVO WORKED AT A
POP-UP CLINIC NEAR THE FRENCH
QUARTER.
LEADER AS THE CITY'S HEALTH
COMMISSIONER, SHE DROVE THE
EFFORT TO BUILD PERMANENT
CLINICS WHERE PEOPLE LIVE.
>> BECAUSE THE HEALTHCARE
INFRASTRUCTURE WENT DOWN, IT
CAUSED MANY OF US TO LITERALLY
STAND ON THE STREET AND SAY WE
CAN DO BETTER, WE CAN COME UP
OFF OUR KNEES AND BUILD A SYSTEM
THAT'S GOING TO MEET THE NEEDS
OF THIS COMMUNITY.
LOOKING AT THE EVIDENCE AND
LISTENING TO PEOPLE THAT WHAT
THEY WANTED WAS FRONT LINE
ACCESS TO PREVENTATIVE AND
PRIMARY CARE IN NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> CHARITY'S EMERGENCY ROOM HAD
BEEN A PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF
PRIMARY CARE BUT HABITS AND
SERVICES ARE SLOWLY CHANGING.
>> I KNOW WHERE IT IS.
SYLVIA'S PRIMARY CARE DOCTOR
KEITH WINFREY IS PRIMARY CARE
DOCTOR IN A COMMUNITY OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN AND VIETNAMESE
RESIDENTS.
>> PRIOR TO KATRINA, IT WAS MORE
THE TRADITIONAL
PHYSICIAN-PATIENT INTERACTION
AND THE POPULATION WASN'T
DIFFERENT.
SINCE KATRINA, THERE IS BEEN A
TOTAL TRANSFORMATION IN PRIMARY
CARE, MORE OF A TEAM MODEL AND
THE PATIENTS ARE HE.OM
>> HENRY WHOSE HOME ON LAKE
PONTCHARTRAIN WAS BADLY DAMAGED
WAS CUT OFF FROM HER DOCTORS,
CHARTS AND MEDICAL RECORDS
CHARTING DIABETES AND HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE.
SHE RETURNED TO ELECTRONIC
MEDICAL RECORDS THAT WILL
SURVIVE A STORM.
>> EVERY TIME I GO, THEY GET ON
THE COMPUTER AND THEY CAN TELL
ME EVERYTHING THAT IS GOING ON.
WHEN I GO TO SEE THE DOCTOR IN
THE ROOM, THE DOCTOR HAS A
RECORD THAT THEY CAN OPEN, A
PAPER RECORD THEY CAN TELL ME
WHAT IS GOING ON.
>> NOW, IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING
THAT YOU HAVE BEEN SENT TO BE
SEEN BY YOUR PRIMARY CARE
DOCTOR.
>> MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ARE
WOVEN IN TO CLINIC SERVICES AND
MOBILE VANS OFFER ON THE SPOT
SUPPORT, BUT IT IS WIDELY
ACKNOWLEDGED HERE THAT FAR MORE
IS NEEDED.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT HAS LONG
WORKED WITH THE MENTALLY ILL WHO
HAVE HAD RUN INS WITH THE LAW.
SHE IS INCENSED THE NEW HOPPED
HAS CURRENTLY A THIRD
PSYCHIATRIC BEDS THAT CHARITY
ONCE HELD.
>> WE'RE STANDING IN FRONT OF
ORLEANS PARISH PRISON TODAY.
THIS IS OUR LARGEST MENTAL
HEALTH HOSPITAL IN OUR
COMMUNITY, WHICH IS SO SAD,
BECAUSE THIS IS NOT WHERE
TREATMENT IS GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> THE GREAT UNCERTAINTY IN
SUSTAINING THE NEW HOSPITAL AND
THE CLINICS IS MONEY.
GOVERNOR BOBBY JINDAL DID NOT
EXPAND MEDICAID UNDER THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND SO MANY
UNINSURED PATIENTS NEED FREE
CARE.
AS PART OF THE LAW, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS REDUCING THE
DOLLARS IT SENDS STATES FOR THAT
CARE.
>> I THINK WE STILL MOSTLY HAVE
QUESTIONS IN THE AREA OF HOW
WE'RE GOING TO FINANCE THIS
SYSTEM LONG TERM THAT WILL BE
AFFORDABLE FOR EVERYONE.
>> I THINK IT'S GOING TO TAKE A
LOT OF VIGILANCE, A LOT OF
ADVOCACY AND A LOT OF DEMAND FOR
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ALL OF THIS
TO WORK.
>> AND HE GOT MY MEDICINES FOR
ME.
>> STILL, FOR PEOPLE LIKE
SYLVIANA HENRY, A FAR MORE
ROBUST SYSTEM IS IN PLACE TO
CARE FOR PEOPLE THAN THE FRAGILE
SYSTEM THAT KATRINA WASHED AWAY.
FOR THE PBS "NewsHour", JACKIE
JUDD IN NEW ORLEANS.
>> Ifill: THE FUTURE OF PATIENT
CARE IS ONLY ONE OF THE CONCERNS
CASTING A SHADOW OVER THE
CRESCENT CITY TEN YEARS LATER.
A NEW REPORT OUT TODAY HAS A
SOBERING ASSESSMENT OF OTHER
PROBLEMS PLAGUING ITS MAJORITY
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
AMONG ITS FINDINGS: IN 2005, 44%
OF BLACK CHILDREN IN NEW ORLEANS
WERE LIVING IN POVERTY.
THAT NUMBER HAS GONE UP TO 51%.
AND THE EARNINGS GAP BETWEEN
BLACK AND WHITE FAMILIES HAS
INCREASED BY 18%.
AFRICAN AMERICAN HOUSEHOLDS
BRING IN ROUGHLY $25,000 A YEAR.
WHITE HOUSEHOLDS, $60,000.
THE NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE STUDY
ON THESE AND OTHER DISPARITIES
WAS RELEASED TODAY IN NEW
ORLEANS.
I SAT DOWN WITH C.E.O. MARC
MORIAL TO TALK ABOUT IT WHEN I
WAS IN THE CITY EARLIER THIS
WEEK.
>> Ifill: MARC MORIAL, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
YOU ARE THE SON OF A MAYOR,
FORMER STATE SENATOR, FORMER
MAYOR OF NEW ORLEANS.
AND NOW AS HEAD OF THE URBAN
LEAGUE, YOU'VE COME OUT WITH A
REPORT IN WHICH YOU TAKE STOCK
OF WHAT'S HAPPENED IN THE 10
YEARS SINCE KATRINA.
IT READS LIKE A TALE OF TWO
CITIES.
>> IT IS A TALE OF TWO CITIES.
NEW ORLEANS HAS LONG BEEN, LIKE
MANY AMERICAN CITIES, A TALE OF
TWO CITIES.
AND I THINK IT'S CLEAR AS YOU
TAKE THIS SNAPSHOT TEN YEARS
LATER AFTER THIS TRAGEDY OF
KATRINA THAT IT'S STILL A TALE
OF TWO CITIES.
YES, WITH GREAT PHYSICAL
REBUILDING, YES A CITY THAT
SURVIVED A TREMENDOUS CHALLENGE.
BUT THAT'S WHY I THINK WE HAVE
TO LOOK AT THIS AS A
COMMEMORATION AS A CONTINUATION,
AND NOT A CELEBRATION.
>> Ifill: THERE'S BEEN SO MUCH
CONVERSATION OVER THE YEARS
ABOUT BOUNCING BACK.
WE TALKED ABOUT RESILIENCE,
ABOUT THE ABILITY OF NEW
ORLEANIANS TO RECREATE WHAT HAD
BEEN WASHED AWAY.
BUT LET'S TALK ABOUT THE ISSUES
ONE BY ONE.
EDUCATION.
WHAT DOES YOUR REPORT FIND?
>> SO OUR REPORT FINDS CERTAINLY
THAT YOU'VE GOT A HIGHER HIGH
SCHOOL GRADUATION RATE.
BUT OUR REPORT ALSO FINDS THAT
WHEN IT COMES TO CHILDREN, THERE
ARE MORE CHILDREN IN POVERTY
TODAY THAN THERE WERE BEFORE
KATRINA.
AND THAT WHEN IT COMES TO
EDUCATION, WHILE YOU SEE SIGNS
OF PROGRESS.
THERE ARE NEW SCHOOLS, THERE'S,
IF YOU WILL, IMPROVEMENTS IN
SCHOOLS.
THE TRUTH IS THAT IT'S A SCHOOL
DISTRICT WITH FEWER STUDENTS.
IT'S TRUE THAT THESE REFORMS
HAVE COME AT A TREMENDOUS COST
TO THE CITY, AND THAT COST WAS
THE LAYOFF OF SOME 7,000 MOSTLY
AFRICAN-AMERICAN UNIONIZED
TEACHERS ALMOST TEN YEARS D THAA
SCAR.
AND PAIN ON THE EFFORT TO REFORM
THE SCHOOLS.
NOW, IT'S ALL ABOUT WHAT'S DOING
BEST FOR KIDS.
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR
PEOPLE TO BE MEASURED.
AT THIS POINT, IT'S LIKE
HALFTIME.
>> Ifill: AS I DRIVE THROUGH THE
CITY, I SEE NEW CONSTRUCTION,
HOUSES WITH SOLAR PANELS, ALONG
THE RIVERFRONT, NEW LEVEES.
THIS ALL SPEAKS TO AN INCREDIBLE
REBIRTH IN THE HOUSING MARKET.
YET A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY THEY
CAN'T AFFORD IT.
>> WHAT HAPPENED IS THAERALLY, ,
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF UNITS
WERE EITHER SUBSTANTIALLY
DAMAGED OR DESTROYED, AND THAT
THERE'S BEEN A GREAT REBUILDING
THAT WE NEED TO APPLAUD.
HOWEVER, THERE ISN'T ENOUGH
HOUSING IN THE CITY, QUALITY
HOUSING IN THE CITY, TO
ACCOMMODATE WHAT IS NOW A
GROWING POPULATION.
AND THAT IS INDEED THE CASE.
SO THE SIGNS OF PHYSICAL REBIRTH
ARE EVERYWHERE.
AND I ABSOLUTELY APPLAUD THAT.
BUT WHAT NEW ORLEANS NEEDS TODAY
IS AN EFFORT TO BUILD MORE
WORKFORCE HOUSING.
MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
MORE HOUSING THAT PEOPLE CAN
BOTH RENT AND OWN IN TERMS OF
WHERE WE ARE.
SO THAT SPEAKS, GWEN, REALLY TO
THIS POINT THAT THIS, IN THIS
10TH YEAR, THE FOCUS SHOULD BE
ON WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN IN THE
NEXT TEN TO 15 YEARS.
AND BUILDING MORE WORKFORCE AND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING I THINK IS A
MUST.
OR, OR, THE RECOVERY AND THE
REBUILDING WILL STALL BECAUSE
IT'LL SIMPLY BE JUST TOO
EXPENSIVE FOR PEOPLE TO BE ABLE
TO AFFORD A DECENT HOME.
>> Ifill: SO APPLY THAT FUTURE-
LOOKING ORIENTATION TO SOMETHING
LIKE UNEMPLOYMENT, WHERE
ESPECIALLY BLACK TEEN
UNEMPLOYMENT IS HIGH EVERYWHERE.
BUT IT'S ESPECIALLY GRIEVOUS
HERE.
HOW CAN THAT BE, HOW HAS THAT
BEEN OVERLOOKED, OR HAS IT?
>> I THINK IT HAS NOT HAD THE
EMPHASIS.
I THINK THE ISSUES OF EQUITY
HAVE NOT BEEN CENTER STAGE IN
THE RECOVERY.
LET'S JUST GO BACK JUST FOR A
MINUTE.
AT THE VERY BEGINNING AFTER THE
HURRICANE, THERE WAS A DALLAS
PLAN.
I CALL IT A DALLAS PLAN, BECAUSE
IT WAS ACTUALLY WRITTEN IN
DALLAS BY CERTAIN BUSINESS
LEADERS FOR NEW ORLEANS, THAT
WOULD HAVE DECOMMISSIONED,
TURNED CERTAIN HISTORIC
NEIGHBORHOODS, MIDDLE-CLASS AND
WORKING-CLASS AND POOR AFRICAN-
AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOODS INTO
LAGOONS.
AND NOT ONLY AFRICAN-AMERICAN
NEIGHBORHOODS, BUT NEIGHBORHOODS
LIKE ST. BERNARD PARISH.
WHICH WERE COMPLETELY
DEVASTATED, AND WHICH HAPPENS TO
BE A NEIGHBORHOOD MADE UP OF
MOSTLY WORKING-CLASS WHITE
PEOPLE.
SO THESE DECISIONS THAT WERE
MADE STALLED THE RECOVERY.
>> Ifill: YOU MENTIONED ST.
BERNARD'S PARISH, WHERE RECENTLY
THEY VOTED AGAINST RAISING TAXES
TO PAY FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF
THE NEW LEVEES.
EVERY HOUSE IN ST. BERNARD
PARISH FLOODED.
ISN'T THERE SOME PERSONAL
RESPONSIBILITY THAT THE
RESIDENTS NEED TO TAKE IN THE
RECOVERY?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK WHEN PEOPLE VOTE AGAINST
TAXES, IN THIS PART OF THE
COUNTRY, IT SOMETIMES IS ALSO A
REFLECTION OF THE REALITY OF
PEOPLE BELIEVING THEY CAN'T
AFFORD TO PAY.
BUT NO DOUBT, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
IN NEW ORLEANS TAXES HAVE RISEN,
A NUMBER OF TIMES OVER THE LAST
TEN YEARS, TO PAY FOR MANY, MANY
THINGS.
REMEMBER YOU'VE GOT A SMALLER
POPULATION BASE IN THE CITY
TODAY THAN YOU HAD PRE-KATRINA.
>> Ifill: AS YOU PUT OUT THE
RESULTS OF THIS REPORT AND AS A
SON OF NEW ORLEANS, DO YOU, 10
YEARS LATER, FEEL MORE
OPTIMISTIC OR LESS OPTIMISTIC
ABOUT WHERE THE CITY IS HEADED
IN THE NEXT 10 YEARS?
>> I'M OPTIMISTIC.
LET ME TELL YOU WHY I'M
OPTIMISTIC.
I STOOD ON THE NINTH WARD LEVEE
A WEEK AFTER THIS HURRICANE, AND
I QUESTIONED IN MY, IN THE
DEPTHS OF MY HEART AND MY SOUL,
WHETHER THE CITY WOULD EVER BE
ABLE TO STAND ON ITS TWO FEET
AGAIN.
NEW ORLEANS COULD HAVE BEEN,
BECOME A MODERN POMPEII.
A MODERN HERCULANEUM.
A CITY LOST TO HURRICANE
KATRINA.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS THAT
THE CITY'S UNIQUENESS, IT'S
MUSIC, IT'S CULTURE, IT'S
STANDING, IT'S PEOPLE SAID
ABSOLUTELY, THIS CITY MUST BE
REBUILT.
SO AGAINST THAT BACKDROP, I'M
OPTIMISTIC.
BUT I REALIZE IT'S A VERY LONG
JOURNEY, AND WHAT OUR REPORT
SEEKS TO SAY IS LOOK, WE'RE ALL
HAPPY TO BE HERE AT YEAR NUMBER
TEN AS NEW ORLEANIANS AND AS
CERTAINLY CHAMPIONS OF URBAN
COMMUNITIES AND CHAMPIONS OF
FAIRNESS AND EQUITY IN AMERICA.
HOWEVER, THE WORK THAT HAS TO BE
DONE IN THE FUTURE, AND THE
EMPHASIS THAT NEEDS TO BE PLACED
ON THESE ISSUES IN THE FUTURE,
HAS TO BE GREATER THAN IT'S BEEN
IN THE FIRST TEN YEARS IF, IN
FACT, THIS REBUILDING AND THIS
RECOVERY IS NOT ONLY GOING TO BE
COMPLETE BUT IS GOING TO BE
SOMETHING WE CAN ALL BE PROUD
OF.
>> Ifill: MARC MORIAL, C.E.O. OF
THE NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: WELCOME HOME.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US.
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
INNOVATORS DESIGN A CANE OF THE
FUTURE FOR THE BLIND AND
VISUALLY IMPAIRED AND FROM THE
SOUTH BRONX TO SESAME STREET--
ACTRESS SONIA MANZANO ON
BECOMING MARIA.
BUT FIRST, THE BATTLE OVER
PLANNED PARENTHOOD IS HEATING UP
THIS WEEK AS OPPONENTS OF
ABORTION RIGHTS RELEASED MORE
UNDERCOVER VIDEOS AND HELD
WEEKEND PROTESTS.
MEANTIME, PLANNED PARENTHOOD
ITSELF LAUNCHED A LAWSUIT
AGAINST THE STATE OF LOUISIANA'S
ATTEMPT TO CUT ITS FUNDING.
ALL OF THIS IS HAVING AN EFFECT
IN THE RACE FOR THE WHITE HOUSE.
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS REPORTS.
A WARNING: IT CONTAINS SOME
GRAPHIC IMAGES.
>> WE ARE STANDING IN
SOLIDARITY!
>> Reporter: EARLY MORNING
SATURDAY, NEARLY 200 ABORTION
RIGHTS ACTIVISTS PROTESTING.
BANNERS UP,ATTL BE READY, THIS
SCENE REPEATED ACROSS THE
COUNTRY THIS WEEKEND FROM
PORTLAND, MAINE, TOLADA.
TENS OF THOUSANDS TURNED OUT,
MOTIVATED BY RECENT
CONTROVERSIAL VIDEOS ON YOUTUBE.
>> THESE VIDEOS WERE NOT MADE
UP.
THESE VIDEOS ARE SO POWERFUL!
>> Reporter: PLANNED
PARENTHOOD OPPONENTS MEAN VIDEOS
BY ANTI-ABORTION ACTIVIST POSING
AS BUSINESSMEN TRYING TO BUY
TISSUE.
THEY SAY PLANNED PARENTHOOD IS
HEARTLESS, MOTIVATED BY MONEY.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD DENIED THAT,
SAYING IT CARES FOR MILLIONS OF
PATIENCE.
THE ORGANIZATION POINTS TO EDITS
IN THE UNDERCOVER VIDEOS THAT
LEFT OUT THE WORKER CLEARLY
SAYING THEY DO NOT SELL FETAL
TISSUE.
WHATEVER YOU MAKE OF THEM, THE
VIDEOS ARE A MATCH IN A HEATED
CAMPAIGN YEAR.
>> THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO NEED
FOR ANY PUBLIC FUNDING OF
PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
THERE IS NO EXCUSE FOR IT.
>> THERE IS NO EXCUSE.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD MUST BE
DEFUNDED.
>> JEB BUSH CAUSED A STIR
YESTERDAY AT A COLORADO TOWN
HALL WHEN HE TURNED TO SAY
THIS --
>> I FOR ONE DON'T THINK PLANNED
PARENTHOOD OUGHT TO GET A PENNY,
THOUGH, AND THAT'S THE
DIFFERENCE, BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
ACTUALLY DOING WOMEN'S HEALTH
ISSUES.
>> Reporter: PLANNED
PARENTHOOD SHOWS THE BULK OF
THEIR SERVICES ARE WOMEN'S
HEALTH, STD TESTING, CARNES
SCREENING AND THAT ABORTIONS ARE
ONLY 3% OF THEIR SERVICES.
MOCRDEATS ARE JUMPING TO THE PRO
PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
>> I THINK IT IS REGRETTABLE
THAT REPUBLICANS ARE, ONCE
AGAIN, TRYING TOUNDE RMINE EVEN
AND THOSE SERVICES SO MANY WOMEN
HAVE NEEDED AND TAKEN ADVANTAGE
OF.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
BOTH SIDES ARE WINNING, BY
FIRING UP THEIR BASES.
DAVID IS THE ANTI-ABORTION
ACTIVIST BEHIND THE UNDERCOVER
VIDEOS BUILDING CROWDS ON HIS
SIDE.
ABORTION POLITICS AND PROTESTS
ARE NOT NEW, BUT HE BELIEVES HIS
VIDEOS HAVE STARTED A NEW SHIFT
IN THE DEBATE.
>> IT'S COMPLETELY CHANGING THE
WAY WE TALK ABOUT ABORTION AND
UNBORN CHILDREN IN AMERICA.
I THINK IT'S REALLY CAUSING A
CHANGE IN HOW THAT CONVERSATION
HAPPENS, AND THAT'S A GOOD
THING, BECAUSE IT'S A
CONVERSATION THAT'S NEEDED TO
HAPPEN FOR A LONG TIME.
>> Reporter: GO TO PLANNED
PARENTHOOD OFFICES IN WASHINGTON
AND VICE PRESIDENT DON MCGHANS
WILL TELL YOU THE --
>> PEOPLE ARE DROPPING OFF BOXES
OF DOANTS AND BUNDLES OF FLOWERS
TO OUR HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS TO
SAY THANK YOU FOR WHAT YOU DO
EVERY DAY.
THAT'S WHAT WE SEE.
THE IRONY OF THESE ATTACKS ON US
IS THEY TEND TO GET MORE PEOPLE
SAYING, OH, I DIDN'T KNOW THIS
IS AT RISK, I'M GOING TO STAND
UP FOR IT.
>> Reporter: YOU SEE DONATIONS
GOING UP?
>> EVERYTHING IS GOING UP.
ABORTION BECAME THE KEY LIT
MUTT TEST IN THE REPUBLICAN AND
DEMOCRAT PARTY.
>> Reporter: A PROFESSOR AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
STUDIES ABORTION POLITICS.
THESE VIDEOS, THERE'S ANOTHER
FACTOR AT WORK, THE VIDEOS TOUCH
THE AMERICAN MIDDLE GROUND.
>> YOU'VE HAD PEOPLE WHO WERE
VERY SUPPORTIVE OF AIORIGHTS, OE
VERY ANTI-ABORTION, AND IN THE
MIDDLE A LARGE NUMBER OF
AMERICANS, THE MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS, WHO SUPPORT THEIR
RIGHT OF ABORTION BUT, YOU KNOW,
HAVE SOME ISSUES WITH ABORTION.
>> Reporter: ENTER RISK FOR
REPUBLICANS LIKE SENATOR TED
CRUZ WHO ARE HARD CHARGING
AGAINST PLRPT.
>> I CALL ON THE UNITED STATES
CONGRESS RIGHT NOW TODAY TO
STAND UP AND PLEAD AND TO DEFUND
PLANNED PARENTHOOD!
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: CRUZ HELD LAL
RALEIGHS ON THE ISSUE AND
ANNOUNCED LAST WEEK HE WOULD
PUSH THE U.S. SENATE TO DEFUND
PLANNED PARENTHOOD IN SEPTEMBER.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, CUT THE
FUNDG ANIND YOU WOULD
POTENTIALLY CRIPPLE PLANNED
PARENTHOOD.
THAT'S NO PROBLEM FOR
REPUBLICANS.
WHAT IS?
OTHER NUMBERS.
A RECENT REUTERS POLL SHOWED 54%
OF AMERICANS OVERALL SUPPORT
FUNDING PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
BUT NOWLO
STATE, FLORIDA, WHICH COULD
DECIDE THE PRIMARY AND THE
ELECTION.
IN A QUINNIPIAC FOUL THIS WEEK,
FLORIDA REPUBLICAN VOTERS
OVERWHELMINGLY SAID THEY WANT TO
DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
BUT ASKLL T AHE VOTERS IN THE
STATE, THE MAJORITY SWITCHES,
MOST WANT TO KEEP THE FUNDING.
POLLS IN OHIO AND PENNSYLVANIA
SHOW SAME POTENTIAL RISK,
REPUBLICANS GO ONE WAY, GENERAL
ELECTION VOTERS THE OTHER.
>> I THINK IT'S INTERESTING TO
WATCH THE REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES
TRY TO OUTDO EACH OTHER.
THAT MAY PROVIDE LEVERAGE FOR
SENATOR CRUZ, FOR EXAMPLE, WHO'S
REALLY THE MOST RADICAL ON THIS
ISSUE.
IN TERMS OF THE GENERAL
ELECTION, YOU KNOW, I THINK THIS
COULD ADVANTAGE HILLARY CLINTON.
>> Reporter: BACK AT THAT
MORNING, PROSTSTE IN WASHINGTON,
ASK ABOUT LOSING THE WHITE HOUSE
IF REPUBLICANS PUSH TOO HARD TO
CLOSE PLANNED PARENTHOOD?
>> IF THAT COSTS THE ELECTION,
THEN IT DOES.
SOMETIMES WE DO HAVE TO TAKE THE
CONSEQUENCES THAT FOLLOW.
>> Reporter: BOTH SIDES ARE
GEARING UP FOR A HOT SEPTEMBER.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD IS
CONSIDERING A NATIONAL BUS TOUR
AND A NEW SERIES OF ADS.
MEAN WHILE, OPPONENTS PLANNED A
CAPITOL HILL RALLY, AN ISSUE IN
CONGRESS THAT COULD LOOM LARGE
IN THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS,
BOTH PRIMARY AND GENERAL.
LISA DESJARDINS, PBS
>> Ifill: NOW, AN INNOVATION
THAT MAY HELP THE BLIND BECOME
MORE INDEPENDENT.
IT'S A NEW TAKE ON THE FAMILIAR
WHITE CANE THAT THE VISUALLY
IMPAIRED HAVE BEEN USING FOR
DECADES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN
REPORTS FROM THE NORTHEAST
REGION OF FRANCE FOR THE LATEST
IN OUR "BREAKTHROUGHS" SERIES ON
INVENTION AND INNOVATION.
>> Reporter: LYSIANE PERNEY
DOESN'T SEE THE WORLD THE WAY
MOST PEOPLE DO.
IN FACT, SHE DOESN'T SEE MUCH OF
IT AT ALL.
PERNEY, WHO LIVES IN THEITY  COF
NANCY IN NORTHEASTERN FRANCE,
SUFFERS FROM RETINITIS
PIGMENTOSA.
PHOTORECEPTOR CELLS IN HER EYES,
THE RODS AND CONES, HAVE BEEN
DYING.
AND THAT CAUSES E GRTHADUAL LOSS
OF EVERYTHING BUT CENTRAL
VISION, AND THE ABILITY TO SEE
COLORS.
>> ( translated ): WHEN YOU MOVE
AROUND IN A CITY WHEN YOU ARE
VISUALLY IMPAIRED, IT IS VERY
STRESSFUL.
KNOWING WHERE YOU ARE, HAVING
SOME LANDMARKS, KNOWING THIS IS
THE RIGHT BUS LINE.
>> Reporter: NEVERTHELESS,
PERNEY IS A BUSY, INDEPENDENT
WOMAN.
AN ELECTED CITY COUNCIL MEMBER
AND ADVOCATE FOR THE DISABLED.
SHE MOVES AROUND WITH THE HELP
OF A FEW SMARTPHONE APPS AND A
WHITE CANE, THE KIND THE
VISUALLY IMPAIRED HAVE BEEN
USING FOR DECADES TO AVOID
OBSTACLES.
BUT SOON, SHE MAY BE ABLE TO BUY
A NEW KIND OF CANE, ONE THAT
WILL TELL HER A LOT MORE ABOUT
HER SURROUNDINGS.
>> YOU CAN HAVE REAL TIME
INFORMATION DURING YOUR WALK
LIKE YOU CAN HAVE INFORMATION
ABOUT PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION,
ABOUT THE SHOPS, PUBLIC PLACES,
YOU CAN HAVE AT WHAT TIME THE
SHOP OPEN.
>> Reporter: FLORIAN ESTEVES AND
MATHIEU CHEVALIER ARE
ENGINEERING GRADUATES TURNED
BUDDING ENTREPRENEURS WHO ARE
DEVELOPING AN "INTELLIGENT WHITE
CANE."
THEY'VE CREATED A HIGH-TECH BOX
THAT FITS ON A TRADITIONAL WHITE
CANE.
AND USES INFRARED AND ULTRASONIC
SENSORSO DE TTECT OBSTACLES
TRIGGERING THE HANDLE TO
VIBRATE.
>> JUST BY PRESSING A BUTTON YOU
CAN HEAR "THE LIGHT IS GREEN,
THE LIGHT IS RED, YOU CAN CROSS,
BE CAREFUL ABOUT MAYBE A CAR
WAIT A MINUTE."
>> Reporter: THEIR CANE ALSO
INCORPORATES GPS TECHNOLOGY TO
DETERMINE A PERSON'S LOCATION,
AND WILL SHARE DATA FROM THE
CITY OF NCY NAAND ELSEWHERE THAT
WILL BE RELAYED THROUGH A
BLUETOOTH HEADSET.
THE IDEA FOR THE "INTELLIGENT
WHITE CANE" WAS HATCHED DURING
ESTEVES AND CHEVALIER STUDIES AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF LORRAINE.
THEY ENTERED "LE DEFI CISCO",
A CONTEST DESIGNED TINSPO IRE
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS TO
SOLVE SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROBLEMS.
>> WE JUST OBSERVED THAT THESE
PEOPLE ONLY USE A SIMPLE STICK
EVERY DAY TO WORK IN THE CITY.
AND WE HAD ALL THE SAME
REACTION.
WITH ALL OF THE CURRENT
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CURRENT
OBJECT, WE CAN DO BETTER.
>> Reporter: AND THEIR BETTER
STICK WON.
THE CONTEST SPONSOR, CISCO
FRANCE, AWARDED THE TEAM THE TOP
PRIZE AND 70,000 EUROS,
ABOUT $77,500.
>> FOR THE CONTEST, WHAT WE WERE
TRYING TO CHOOSE IS PROJECTS
THAT ARE TOUCHING THE LIFE OF
PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: REMI SEDILOT IS THE
COMPANY'S SALES AND MARKETING
DIRECTOR IN FRANCE.
HE NOW MENTORS ESTEVES AND
CHEVALIER AS THEY TRY TO GROW
THEIR NEW COMPANY HANDISCO AND
GET THE INTELLIGENT CANE READY
FOR THE MARKET.
>> LED FOR NIGHT VISIBILITY..
AND SOME BUTTONS TO INTERACT.
>> Reporter: AS TRAINED
ENGINEERS, ESTEVES AND CHEVALIER
ADMIT THEY CAN USE SEDILOT'S
HELP ON THE BUSINESS END.
>> I'M JUST TRYING TO HELP THEM
TO IDENTIFY THE RIGHT CONTACTS
OR THE RIGHT THINGS TO DO TO BE
READY.
TO HAVE A GOOD MARKET STUDY,
WHAT IS THE PRICING STRUCTURE
THEY SHOULD HAVE SO THEY HAVE A
CHANCE TO SELL?
>> Reporter: BUT BEFORE THEY CAN
SELL, THEY HAVE TO REFINE EIRTH
PROTOTYPE.
THE PAIR HAS BEEN WORKING
CLOSELY WITH THE CITY OF NANCY
TO  PURSUE ADDITIONAL FUNDING,
AND FIND A WAY TO GET EXISTING
DATA ABOUT TRANSPORTATION
SCHEDULES, ACCESSIBILITY AND
OTHER SERVICES INTO A COMPUTER
PROGRAM THAT WORKS WITH THE
CANE.
ESTEVES AND CHEVALIER ARE ALSO
COLLABORATING WITH EVENTUAL
USERS OF THEIR PRODUCT.
>> THEY TELL US ALL THE PROBLEM
THEY CAN ENCOUNTER IN EVERYDAY
LIFE, SO THAT'S REALLY HELP US
TO BUILD OUR FUNCTIONALITY
AROUND THEIR PROBLEM.
LIKE THE PROBLEM OF PORTABILITY.
SINCE THE BOX FITS ON AN
EXISTING WHITE CANE, IT FOLDS
AND UNFOLDS JUST AS EASILY.
>> YOU CAN COLLAPSE IT TO PUT IN
YOUR BAG.
>> IS THAT SOMETHING THAT BLIND
PEOPLE TOLD YOU WAS NECESSARY?
>> YEAH.
>> YES.
VERY, VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: THAT KIND OF
INSIGHT HAS COME FROM A
PARTNERSHIP WITH ASSOCIATION
VALENTIN HUAY, A FRENCH
ORGANIZATION SUPPORTING THE
VISUALLY IMPAIRED.
>> ( translated ): THE STICK IS
A MARVELOUS OBJECT BECAUSE IT
PROVIDES WITH ALL THAT THEIR EYE
CAN'T GIVE THEM.
75% OF ALL INFORMATION COMES
THROUGH VISION.
>> Reporter: MARIE-JOSE
DIEUDONNE HAS BEEN WORKING WITH
NANCY'S VISUALLY IMPAIRED FOR
YEARS AND RUNS THE ASSOCIATION'S
OFFICE THERE.
SHE BELIEVES THERE IS A READY
MARKET FOR THE CANE, EVEN AT AN
EXPECTED COST OF 500 EUROS.
>> ( translated ): I THINK 30%
OF THE VISUALLY IMPAIRED WOULD
GO FOR SUCH A PRODUCT.
SO ALL THE PEOPLE BETWEEN 30 AND
75.
WITH THE BABY BOOM, THERE ARE
MORE AND MORE SENIORS, AND THEY
WILL OPT FOR A CONNECTED STICK.
IT IS AN AGE GROUP THAT IS
ALREADY "CONNECTED" AND I THINK
IT COULD ANSWER A NEED IN THAT
AGE GROUP.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, LYSIANE
PERNEY HAS BEEN TESTING THE
WEIGHT OF THE PROTOTYPE MODEL,
AND WISHES IT COULD BE A BIT
LIGHTER.
AND SHE IS LOOKING FORWARD TO
PLAYING A ROLE IN THE NEXT STAGE
OF THE CANE'S DEVELOPMENT,
TAKING IT FOR A REAL TRIAL RUN
AS SOON AS THE COMPUTER
PROGRAMMING IS FINISHED.
>> ( translated ): I WAS A BIT
SKEPTICAL ABOUT SOMETHING NEW
COMING ONTO THE MARKET.
BUT I WANTED TO TEST IT BECAUSE
THE BEST ONES TO TRY IT OUT ARE
US THE END-USERS, VISUALLY
IMPAIRED PEOPLE.
I REJOICED IN DISCOVERING THAT
IT COULD BRING US SOMETHING
MORE.
>> Reporter: AND THE HOPE IS THE
CANE WILL GIVE THE VISUALLY
IMPAIRED MORE INFORMATION AND
MORE CONFIDENCE TO SUCCESSFULLY
NAVIGATE THE WORLD ON THEIR OWN.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M APRIL
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT: AS
SHE ANNOUNCES HER RETIREMENT, AN
ICON OF CHILDREN'S TELEVISION
LOOKS BACK AT HER LIFE AND HOW
SHE GOT TO SESAME STREET.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT STORY.
>> HERE WE HAVE IT!
THE PART OF THE BODY WE ARE
GOING TO TALK ABOUT TODAY --
DA-DA-DA-DA!
>> Brown: IT'S WOVEN INTO THE
CHILDHOOD MEMORY OF MANY
GENERATIONS.
FOR MUCH OF HER LIFE, SONIA
MANZANO WAS PART OF SESAME
STREET AS ONE OF ITS WRITERS AND
A CHARACTER.
>> COOKIES AND CUPCAKES ARE GOOD
SOMETIMES BUT I WANT EVERYONE TO
REALIZE TREATS LIKE THIS CAN BE
TASTY, TOO!
OH, MARIA!
>> OH, COME ON!
THIS IS VERY DISAPPOINTING!
OH, COME ON!
>> Brown: SHE WAS A BELOVED
FIGURE WHO TAUGHT THE BASICS OF
READING AND MATH --
>> O TOOTHPASTE!
>> Brown: BUT ALSO COMPLICATED
LIFE LESSONS ABOUT LOVE,
MARRIAGE, SICKNESS --
>> DON'T YOU REMEMBER WE TOLD
YOU, MR. HOOPER DIED.
HE WAS SICK.
>> OH, YEAH.
>> Brown: FOR MANY VIEWERS,
SHE WAS ALSO THE FIRST LATINA
THEY SAW ON TELEVISION.
TELEVISION.
HOW MUCH OF MARIA IS YOU?
>> SHE'S A BETTER, KINDER SONIA,
SHE'S A MORE PATIENT SONIA, BUT
IT'S ALL -- I WENT EXACTLY FROM
MYSELF.
>> Brown: AND YET THE SAFE,
COMFORTING WORLD WHERE MARIA
LIVED AND WORKED WAS VERY
DIFFERENT FROM THE ONE MANZANO
GREW UP IN, A STORY SHE'S NOW
TELLING IN A NEW MEMOIR,
BECOMING MARIE YANCHTS WHEN I
STARTED THINKING ABOUT LEAVING
SESAME STREET, I STARTED TO
THINK ABOUT MY JOURNEY THERE AND
I WANTED TO EXAMINE WHERE I WENT
RIGHT AND WRONG AND HOW IS IT
POSSIBLE A GIRL FROM MY
BACKGROUND COULD END UP ON THIS
ICONIC TELEVISION SHOW.
>> Brown: MONZANO GREW UP IN
THE WORKING CLASS TENMENTS OF
SOUTH BROKES AND DESCRIBES HER
FATHER SERENADING HER WITH
PUERTO RICAN BALLADS ON THE
GUITAR.
BUT HE WAS ALSO AN ALCOHOLIC
WITH A VIOLENT TEMPER WHO PETE
BOO HER MOTHER, DESTROYED
OBJECTS AROUND THE HOUSE AND
GENERALLY TERRIFIED MONZANO AND
HER SIBLINGS.
>> IN ORDER TO ESCAPE WHAT'S
GOING ON INSIDE THE APARTMENT, I
USED TO LOOK OUTSIDE THE WINDOW,
COMB MY HAIR, DO MY NAILS, READ
BY STREET LIGHT, FINDING THE
FURTHER PLACE, LIKE BEING ON THE
END OF THE BOAT.
>> BEAVER, DON'T EAT SO FAST.
>> Brown: SHE SOUGHT REFUGE IN
TELEVISION THAT DEPICTED SERENE
FAMILY LIFE AS LEAVE IT TO
BEAVER AND FATHER KNOWS BEST.
>> LOST MY HUSBAND --
>> Brown: AND IN QUEEN FOR A
DAY, INVITED DOWN AND OUT WOMEN
TO SHARE STORIES.
>> I THOUGHT MY MOTHER COULD
HAVE A BIG SPOT ON THAT, QUEEN
FOR A DAY, AND WE WOULD GET
SOMETHING OUT OF BEING
MISERABLE, BUT THE OTHER SHOWS
WERE IN SUBURBAN ENVIRONMENTS,
SO I DIDN'T SEE THE NEIGHBORHOOD
I LIVED IN RESPECTED ON
TELEVISION OR PEOPLE, AND I HAVE
TO SAY THAT, ON SOME LEVEL, I
WONDERED WHERE I WAS GOING TO
FIT INTO THIS SOCIETY THAT
DIDN'T SEE ME, WHAT MY
CONTRIBUTION WAS GOING TO BE.
I DECIDED, NO, THAT'S IT, I'M
GOING TO STAND UP FOR MYSELF.
>> Brown: AT SCHOOL, MANZANO
FOUND LIT REEL LEAF FROM HER
CHAOTIC HOME LIFE AT THIS JUNIOR
HIGH SCHOOL GETTING INTO AN
EARLY FIGHT TO PROVE HERSELF.
SHE SAID MERELY SHOWING UP WAS
ENOUGH TO PASS.
>> I THINK I LOST MYSELF IN
WHATEVER BOOKS I COULD FIND.
I HAD A FEELING THAT THERE WAS
SOMETHING BETTER THAN THIS.
I JUST COULDN'T BELIEVE THAT
THIS WAS LIFE.
(SINGING)
>> Brown: AND THEN CAME A
REVELATION -- WHEN MANZANO WAS
11 YEARS OLD, A TEACHER TOOK HER
TO SEE THE FILM "WESTSIDE
STORY," SET IN A PLACE SHE KNEW
ALL TOO WELL BUT SUDDENLY CAST
IN A WHOLE NEW LIGHT.
>> I SAW THINGS I SAW IN MY
EVERYDAY NEIGHBORHOOD BEAUTIFUL,
EXALTED.
ALL OF A SUDDEN THE SCHOOL YARD
FENCE I WANTED TO CLIMB OVER WAS
LIKE A PAINTING.
THE GRAFFITI WAS LIKE SOMETHING
IN A MUSEUM.
I COULDN'T ARTICULATE THIS BUT I
THINK THAT GAVE ME STRENGTH.
>> Brown: A DRAMA TEACHER
ENCOURAGED HERE TO AUDITION FOR
MANHATTAN'S HIGH SCHOOL FOR THE
PERFORMING ARTS AND SHE WAS
ACCEPTED.
SHE STRUGGLED IN A SUDDENLY
RIGOROUS ACADEMIC ENVIRONMENT
BUT HER ACTING HELPED HER GAIN
ENTRY TO CARNEGIE MELLON
UNIVERSITY IN 1968.
ONE YEAR LATER, THE TELLING
VISION SHOW DESIGNED TO REACH
INNER CITY CHILDREN DEBUTED ON
PUBLIC TELEVISION
(SINGING)
>> I NEVER SAW THESE CHEERFUL
ATTRACTIVE, BLACK, FRIENDLY
PEOPLE IN THIS ENVIRONMENT THAT
WAS RECOGNIZABLE TO ME WITH THE
STOOP AND THE TENEMENT DOORS.
I THOUGHT, WHAT'S MY STOOP DOING
ON THE TELEVISION?
>> Brown: IN 1971, MANZANO
AUDITIONED AND AT AGE 22 LANDED
THE PART OF MARIA, A WORLD SHE
WOULD INHABIT FOR THE NEXT 44
YEARS.
SO HAVING WRITTEN THE BOOK TO
FIGURE OUT HOW YOU GOT FROM HERE
TO THERE, DID YOU FIGURE IT OUT?
>> NO.
>> Brown: NO?
NO.
I THINK THERE IS A CONNECTION
THAT I FOUND COMFORT IN
TELEVISION AND THAT I ENDED UP
PROVIDING COMFORT OR WANTING TO
PROVIDE COMFORT FOR CHILDREN WHO
WERE WATCHING TELEVISION THAT I
LOVE THEATER AND I LOVE STORIES.
PEOPLE SAY, OH, SHE OVERCAME A
TERRIBLE CHILDHOOD.
I SAID I DIDN'T OVERCOME MY
DIFFICULT CHILDHOOD.
I SAY THAT I USED IT.
I MADE SOMETHING OF IT.
I NEVER FORGOT IT.
I REMEMBERED MYSELF WATCHING
FATHER KNOWS BEST AND LEAVE IT
TO BEAVER.
I REMEMBERED MYSELF DOING THAT
AND I KEPT THAT SENSIBILITY IN
MY HEART WHILE I WAS DOING
SESAME STREET, WITH THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT THERE IS ANOTHER
KID OUT THERE LOOKING FOR THAT
SANCTUARY.
>> Brown: IN RETIREMENT, SONIA
MANZANO WILL CONTINUE THAT
PURSUIT, AMONG OTHER THINGS
SHE'S NOW WORKING TO ESTABLISH A
CHILDREN'S MUSEUM IN THE BRONX.
FROM THE SOUTH BRONX, I'M
JEFFREY BROWN, WITH PBS
"NewsHour".
>> Woodruff: JUST AFTER JEFF
SPOKE TO SONIA MANZANO, SESAME
STREET ANNOUNCED IT WILL MOVE TO
HBO.
NEW EPISODES OF THE PROGRAM WILL
AIR THERE FIRST AND THEN ON PBS
STATIONS NINE MONTHS LATER.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
JOIN US ONLINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD